## THE HISTORY OF THE INTERNET

The internet, a tool that transformed the world by providing a network
of networks that allowed us to share, log, analyze and produce
information. Following decades of development led by governments and
private entities, the internet became widely accessible to the public in
the late 1990s. As of January 2024, there are 5.35 billion internet
users across the world which is equivalent to 66% of the global
population. Of this total, 5.04 billion users are social media users.
These numbers point to the growing importance of the internet in the
past 30 years. So, what is the internet? How was it developed and
globalized? In this article, the development of the internet throughout
time will be presented.

![How the Internet of Things is taking over the
world](media/image1.png){width="4.607142388451444in"
height="2.592985564304462in"}

### PART-1: EARLY DEVELOPMENTS

The first computer networks were special purpose systems developed in
the late 1950s like AUTODIN I (a defense control and command system).

By the early 1960s time-sharing systems were developed. Time-sharing
systems allowed the resources of a computer -- host -- to be shared
between multiple users by cycling through a queue of the users very fast
so that nobody would feel the delay.

![Learning About Time Sharing Operating System - Shiksha
Online](media/image2.jpeg){width="4.884615048118985in"
height="2.873767497812773in"}

In 1969, the first host-to-host network connection system ARPANET was
created by Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). It connected
time-sharing computers at government supported research sites and
quickly became an essential part of infrastructure of the computer
science research community. It also was the first time a message was
sent via the internet. After a few years Jon Postel started to record
socket numbers in a book which eventually evolved to be the Internet
Assigned Names Authority (IANA) that used to manage the DNS.

![ARPANET geographic map across the united
states](media/image3.jpeg){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.5256944444444445in"}

Soon after, protocols like simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP, known as
e-mail) for sending short messages and file transfer protocol (FTP) for
longer transmissions were developed.

Afterwards, packet switching technology emerged. The logic behind it was
breaking down the data that needed to be sent, into smaller parts that
were called 'packets' so that the transmission wouldn't take up a lot of
joint space. This system accelerated the transfer operations between
users.

![Maximum Packet Size for a TCP Connection \| Baeldung on Computer
Science](media/image4.png){width="5.781958661417323in"
height="2.690475721784777in"}

In the 1970s DARPA (formerly ARPA) supported the development of
ground-based and satellite-based packet networks. While ground-based
packet networks mobilized access to computer systems, satellite-based
packet networks connected the USA to several countries across the world.

Although ground-based packet networks enabled connecting mobilized
terminals to computer systems, the time-sharing computers were too heavy
and hard to carry around. So, developers wanted to connect ground-based
packet networks to ARPANET. Furthermore, in Europe the end users wanted
to use the computer systems that were connected by satellite-based
packet networks to the USA. Therefore, the need to create a network that
connected ground-based and satellite-based packet networks arose.

### PART-2: FOUNDATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

After time-sharing systems, host-to-host connections and packet
switching technique DARPA launched "Internetting" program to investigate
the interconnection of heterogeneous networks (networks connecting
devices that have significant differences in operating systems and
protocols). The program aimed to connect networks with standard
interfaces through gateways. But a new protocol and a new system
architecture were required.

In 1974 DARPA, Standford University and a couple of computer scientists
worked on such a system and came up with transmission control protocol
(TCP), which made heterogeneous networks possible across the globe and
enabled users to process data packets from different devices.

![Data-Flow-of-TCP/IP-protocol](media/image5.jpeg){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="1.8486111111111112in"}

The TCP also included internet protocol, which acted as an addressing
system and enabled the routers to direct data packets to their final
destination. In the 1980s TCP/IP protocol was adopted by US Department
of Defense and soon after, the protocol was also adopted by some
businessmen.

By the 1980s National Science Foundation (NSF) collaborated with DARPA
to expand access to the federally supported research networks. In order
to achieve this goal, NSF funded five supercomputing centers
at [Princeton
University](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Princeton-University),
the [University of
Pittsburgh](https://www.britannica.com/topic/University-of-Pittsburgh),
the [University of
California](https://www.britannica.com/topic/University-of-California), [San
Diego](https://www.britannica.com/place/San-Diego-California),
the [University of
Illinois](https://www.britannica.com/topic/University-of-Illinois),
and [Cornell
University](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Cornell-University) and
connected these centers with NSFNET. After a while NSF also funded some
non-profit networks allowing other users to the NSFNET.

In 1986, a voluntary group, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
began developing new open-source functionality concepts and standards
for both public and commercial use of the internet, and it continues
this work today. IETF's voluntary work has been utilized since its
foundation by many users and internet service providers (ISP).

### PART-3: Expansion and Growth:

The decline in semiconductor prices, the expansion of the integrated
circuit industry, the emergence of local area networks and ethernet, the
development of the personal computer technology in addition to many
other factors prepared the ground for the commercial internet to thrive
and scale up rapidly.

The first commercial internet service provider (ISP) was The World,
founded in 1989 in Massachusetts by David LaQuey aiming to make internet
access available for everybody not just for the academic and research
community. The first rise in the internet traffic followed soon after.

During the early 90s a few commercial networks had come into existence
and since these networks met the research community's needs, in 1995 NSF
shut down the NSFNET. At the same period, Commercial Internet Exchange
was formed to enable the exchange of internet traffic between different
commercial networks.

In 1993, the University of Illinois brought the first internet browser
with graphical interface, Mosaic, into existence by utilizing the tools
that the World Wide Web (WWW) application provided. The WWW was
developed at CERN by Tim Berners-Lee and his colleagues inventing and
integrating many access protocols. Towards the late 90s many other
browsers were introduced, and the WWW had millions of active users.
Also, around 10 thousand ISPs were founded at this time.

![Screenshot of the Mosaic browser, displaying the NCSA\'s home
page\.... \| Download Scientific
Diagram](media/image6.png){width="6.1987182852143485in"
height="4.398711723534558in"}

Beginning in 1995, dot-com enterprises were entering the sector and
stock markets with huge newcomer investor expectations which led to an
almost sevenfold increase in Nasdaq-100 index evaluations in dot-com
companies. But by the year 2000, after seeing no development, the
investors began to lose hope. At the same year the Federal Reserve
increased interest rates triggering investors selling-off their shares
and leading to shrinking in the dot-com industry. This phenomenon was
later named "**The Internet Bubble**".

![Nasdaq-100 - Wikipedia](media/image7.png){width="4.384615048118985in"
height="3.3413123359580053in"}

After the internet bubble burst, Web 2.0 emerged providing better
opportunities for social networking, and focusing on user generated
content as well as cloud computing. With this development social media
sites like Facebook and Twitter gained popularity. After the mobile
phone access to the internet also was introduced an enormous rise in
active internet user numbers was seen. The new concept allowed many
modern technologies to emerge and overall made access to information a
lot easier than it was.

After the growth in blockchain technology a decentralized internet
model, Web 3.0 arose during early 2010s. The model aims to provide a
user-owned, secure internet that is supported with machines and AI for
improved search and data organization.

Today, in 2024, we are globally still in the early stages of a
transition between Web 2.0 and 3.0. Although problems such as
reliability, scalability, and technical complexity in Web 3.0 slow down
this phase, there is no doubt that the development process of the
internet will never stop.

### REFERENCES:

- [World Wide Web \| History, Uses &
  Benefits](https://www.britannica.com/topic/World-Wide-Web)

- [Dot-com bubble \| Definition, History, &
  Facts](https://www.britannica.com/event/dot-com-bubble)

- [The Traitorous Eight & the Start of Something \| by Alan Philips ---
  The Age of Ideas \|
  Medium](https://medium.com/@alan_46156/the-traitorous-eight-the-start-of-something-fd6a5f40a870#id_token=eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjkzYjQ5NTE2MmFmMGM4N2NjN2E1MTY4NjI5NDA5NzA0MGRhZjNiNDMiLCJ0eXAiOiJKV1QifQ.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.rrfFUE4AYTJiOVC3f8tK33S2lQ1y3pedZ-Hwe5iN8mcE7yCfrh7wPZFL_sm0BCd7klwP_niymYEC4kTzQyD60JVYtbIczcTLSDT_KuoXaVFXJSgj5zfWMMOXnmVyXjBBEzNC187BH0jkHBI286euPKXbsX1s-KKYroJzEgHONbVjSgsjMmTn8l1sp7eOFJbro6U4TIEJt6jHGYQvTp1BMm94-unrOGb0EuGIk03_OwylVbA4GPZ8M_Cu9CLPu3yrMZ0Z6OI3Mz3RPQCrX1CprC0Kr19VUEBz7gXi5DUDJrC0TqBcWgg2gPmHTPY6ka_25Zq5USiOeR9VrbKGmjIASw)

- [Internet - Networking, Protocols,
  ARPANET](https://www.britannica.com/technology/Internet/Foundation-of-the-Internet)

- [IETF \| Introduction](https://www.ietf.org/about/introduction/)

- [Ethernet \| Definition &
  Facts](https://www.britannica.com/technology/Ethernet)

- [ICANN History Project - ICANN](https://www.icann.org/history)

- [The History of Silicon Valley \| History
  Cooperative](https://historycooperative.org/history-of-silicon-valley/)

- [Personal computer (PC) \| Definition, History, &
  Facts](https://www.britannica.com/technology/personal-computer)

- [Evolution of the
  Cloud](https://www.tomorrowsworldtoday.com/smart-technology/evolution-of-the-cloud/)

- [TCP/IP Protocol - Architecture, Protocol Suite and
  Layers](https://www.elprocus.com/tcp-ip-protocol-architecture-and-its-layers/)
